# Parkinson's UPDRS Predictions

## Team Information

#### Team Members:
1. Tara Dehdari
2. Patricio Martinez
3. Duy Nguyen

## Project Overview

### Objective

The objective of this project is to utilize telomonitoring data as a non-invasive approach to predict the progression of Parkinson's disease. By developing predictive models, we aim to assist clinicians in remote assessment and reduce operating costs. The predictions generated by our models can provide valuable  insights into the disease's progression, enabling timey and effective interventions. 

### Dataset

The dataset used in this project was obtained from Kaggle and credited to the UCI Machine Learning Repository. It contains 23 variables, and 5875 records extraced from 32 patients.

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thedevastator/unlocking-clues-to-parkinson-s-disease-progressi

## Data Analysis and Preprocessing

### Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

* Data Types and Summary Statistics: We inspected the data types and summary statistics to understand the distribution and basic characteristics of the dataset.

* Visualizations: We created histograms for age and total UPDRS, scatter plots for age vs. total UPDRS, and bar plots for the distribution of males and females.

* Missing Values: We confirmed that there were no missing values in the dataset.

* Outlier Detection: We detected and reviewed outliers using boxplots and the IQR method, concluding that no significant outliers needed removal.

### Data Preprocessing

* Normalization: We normalized the numerical features to ensure all features contribute equally to the model.

* Downsampling: We balanced the dataset by downsampling the majority class (male) to ensure the model is not biased.

* Correlation Analysis: We performed correlation analysis and removed highly correlated features to reduce multicollinearity.

* Splitting Data: We split the data into training (80%) and test (20%) sets for model development and evaluation.

## Model Building and Evaluation

We built multiple models to predict the UPDRS scores and evaluated their performance using Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Mean Aboslute Error (MAE), and R-squared. The models tested include:
1. Linear Regression
2. Random Forest
3. Support Vector Machine (SVM)
4. Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS)
5. Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM)
6. Neural Network

### Hyperparameter Tuning

We performed hyperparameter tuning on the Random Forest model using cross-validation. The best 'mtry' value was found to be 13. 

### Feature Importance

The most influetial features in predicting the UPDRS scores were found to be:
1. Subject
2. Age
3. Test Time
4. Sex
5. RPDE (Reoccurence period density entropy)

### Results

The best model configuration for the Random Forest was achieved with 'mtry =  13', yielding the following performance metrics on the test set:
* RMSE: 0.0321
* MAE: 0.0134
* R-squared: 0.9990

These results indicate that our model has excellent predictive performance, accurately predicting disease preogression using telemonitoring data. The features subject, age, test time, sex, and RPDE were identified as most signficant predictors

## Conclusion

This project demonstrates that predictive models using telemonitoring data can effectively predict the progressin of Parkinson's disease. The Random Forest model showed outstanding performance, making it a valuable tool for clinicians in the remote assessment and management of Parkinson's disease. 

## Instructions for Reproducing the Analysis

1. Clone the Repository: 
    * git clone https://github.com/taradehdari/ParkinsonsPredictor_ADS503.git
2. Install required libraries:
    * install.packages(c("caret", "randomForest", "tidyverse", "ggplot2", "earth", "kernlab", "dplyr", "corrplot"))
3. Run the analysis:
    * Open RMarkdown file provided and run the code blocks sequentially to reproduce the data analysis, model building, and evaluation process. 

